.. _databases:

Databases
=========

The MIT Supercloud allows users to launch their own databases through
the database portal. The portal is located at:

https://txe1-portal.mit.edu/db/dbstatus.php

This page requires you to :ref:`authenticate into the
portal <web_portal>`. From here
you will see all the databases you have access to. There are Accumulo
and Postgress databases available.

To start up a database instance, press "Start". You can stop it by
clicking on the "Stop" button, and can checkpoint a stopped database as
well. Clicking on "View Info" for Accumulo databases will take you to
the Accumulo Monitoring page, where you can view ingest/query plots and
current tables.

If you need an instance created and cannot use one of those already
available, `contact us <https://supercloud.mit.edu/contact>`__. Let us
know the type of database you need, what you are using it for, what it
should be called, and who should have access to the database. Let us
know if there are any special configurations you need.

There are many ways to insert and query data. While this cannot be done
from the portal page, you can query and insert data from any of the
nodes on the MIT Supercloud system. We reccommed using D4M, which has
been installed and pre-configured to work on our system with very little
effort. For more information about databases and how to use them with
D4M, take a look at the Advanced Database Technologies course on our
`online course <https://supercloud.mit.edu/online-courses>`__ platform.
This course contains a good introduction on how to set up a data
pipeline, including parsing, ingesting, and querying data for Accumulo.
